Introduction to the Centre Party
================================

Politics is open
----------------

For a very long time, the Whigs were the main party of British
government.

In the late 19th and early 20th Century, the area where I live was
dominated by the 'Liberal Unionist Party'.

Throughout British history, political parties have transformed into
new forms, or have been replaced by new ones altogether.

There is nothing inevitable about the choices we are offered.

A new approach
--------------

In the mid and late 20th Century, the British political landscape was
dominated by both the Labour party, founded on socialist principles
from Marx and Lenin, and the Tories, based on privilege and capitalist
principles from Adam Smith and Hayek.

However, most people are not so ideological. Most people are more
centrist. We don't want the government to tell us what to do or think
but we do want a national system of healthcare.

It is contradictory, but that is okay. Approaches which work in one
area of life do not work necessarily work in another. We want the
government to regulate train safety but we don't want them to regulate
sock production.

The Nordic countries of Finland, Sweden and Norway each have a 'Centre
Party'. Denmark and Iceland also have something similar under
different names.

These were invented to replace the farmers' parties which had lost any
meaning in the era when most people are not farmers.

The UK Liberal Democrats became a spent force when they ran on a
platform of abolishing student tuition fees and then immediately
introduced them when in office. Also their MPs have murky connections
to special interests, especially to financial institutions and banks.

At one point the UK Liberal Democrats tried to claim itself as a
Centre Party, and sits with the Centre Parties in the European
Parliament, however the emphasis is quite different.

The Nordic Centre parties are non-capitalist and non-socialist, are
often euro-sceptic and believe in political decentralisation. They are
often supported by small businesses rather than large corporations.

In any case, we just liked the name, whatever a UK Centre Party means,
we have to decide it for ourselves.


