UK Senate
=========

Regional chamber
----------------

The House of Lords has an archaic charm but is not fit for the
post-Brexit modern era.

The American model of a Senate works quite well. One of its advantages
is that it provides a regional balance.

This is especially important in the UK where governance is extremely
titled towards London. There are lots of indirect forms of
representation and implicit biases that London enjoys.

There are 100 or so historic counties in the UK, that is way too
many. The US Senate has 100 members but it also has 5 times the
population.

One thing we can keep from our EU days is the regional map.

.. image:: _static/region_map.png

2 senators per region plus 1 senator for overseas territories and
expats gives 25 senators which is a workable number. An odd number is
good to prevent tied votes.

Each term can be four years with staggered elections so that each
region re-elects a senator every two years, apart from the overseas
region which just elects its sole senator every four years.

As in the US Senate, the senator with the longest tenure in each
region is known as the "senior senator"; the other is the "junior
senator".

The Senate should be based somewhere else than London; such as
Birmingham or Manchester.

If the Senate is too powerful it will completely up-end our
constitution. This system prevents that because the regions are not
trying to have an equal population. This gives the House of Commons
more democratic legitimacy and primacy.

Transition
----------

There can be a transition period where existing Lords can speak in the
Senate and assist the Senators but not vote, or if they can vote then
a second majority of the "Lord Senators" are required to block House
of Commons legislation.

There can be a planned phaseout of the old appointed Lords or we can
just let nature run its course.
